**Manuscript title:**

Long-term Survival in Laparoscopic vs Open Resection for Colorectal
Liver Metastases: Inverse Probability of Treatment Weighting using
Propensity Scores

**Authors: **

Joel Lewin (J Lewin)^1^

Nicholas O’Rourke (NA O’Rourke)^1,2^

Adrian Chiow (AKH Chiow)^1^

Richard Bryant (R Bryant)^1,3^

Ian Martin (I Martin)^2^

Leslie Nathanson (LK Nathanson)^2,3^

David Cavallucci (DJ Cavallucci)^1,2^

**Department / Institution:**

1 Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, Royal Brisbane & Women’s Hospital

2 General Surgery, The Wesley Hospital

3 General Surgery, Holy Spirit Northside Hospital

**Correspondence:**

Dr Joel Lewin

Email:
[*joel.lewin@uqconnect.edu.au*](mailto:joel.lewin@uqconnect.edu.au)

Phone: +61 434 091 619

Postal address: 35 McIllwraith Road, Joyner, Queensland, Australia, 4500

**Requests for reprints:**

To be directed to Dr David Cavallucci

Email: [*David@infinitec.com.au*](mailto:David@infinitec.com.au)

**Sources of funding:**

Nil to declare

**Category:**

Original Article

This study was presented at the 2014 Biennial IHPBA conference in Seoul,
South Korea as an oral presentation.

**ABSTRACT**

**Background**

This study compares long-term outcomes between intention-to-treat
laparoscopic and open approaches to colorectal liver metastases (CLM),
using inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) based on
propensity scores to control for selection bias.

**Method**

Patients undergoing liver resection for CLM by 5 surgeons at 3
institutions from 2000 to early 2014 were analysed. IPTW based on
propensity scores were generated and used to assess the marginal
treatment effect of the laparoscopic approach via a weighted Cox
proportional hazards model.

**Results**

A total of 298 operations were performed in 256 patients. 7 patients
with planned two-stage resections were excluded leaving 284 operations
in 249 patients for analysis. After IPTW, the population was well
balanced. With a median follow up of 36 months, 5-year overall survival
(OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS) for the cohort were 59% and 30%.
146 laparoscopic procedures were performed in 140 patients, with
weighted 5-year OS and RFS of 54% and 34% respectively. In the open
group, 138 procedures were performed in 122 patients, with a weighted
5-year OS and RFS of 63% and 25% respectively. There was no significant
difference between the two groups in terms of OS or RFS.

**Conclusion**

In the Brisbane experience, after accounting for bias in treatment
assignment, long term survival after LLR for CLM is equivalent to
outcomes in open surgery.

<span id="h.w8yu8ei3543x" class="anchor"></span>

<span id="h.i63k2d6b8yce" class="anchor"></span>

<span id="h.gjdgxs" class="anchor"></span>**Introduction**

The liver is the most common non-nodal site affected by colorectal
cancer metastases, with approximately 60% of all patients having
developed liver metastases by 5 years following
diagnosis.[^1^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/aVGKQ) The role of
hepatectomy for colorectal liver metastases (CLM) is well established,
with open resection series reporting 5-year overall survival (OS)
between 37-45%.

The application of laparoscopy to liver resection for malignancy remains
somewhat controversial in the absence of randomised controlled trials to
confirm oncologic equivalence to the open approach. With increasing
experience and wider application of laparoscopic liver resection (LLR),
much enthusiasm has been directed towards its use in CLM. Since the
initial reports of LLR in the early
nineties,[^2–5^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/2TIfB+cR7on+UgJu+4JpV)
there has been a steady increase in its use for both benign and
malignant conditions. A recent study on the international experience
with laparoscopic liver resection at 11 experienced centers reported
5388 LLRs and 1184 major LLRs, over half of which were for
malignancy.[^6^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/EPqvz)[](https://paperpile.com/c/Sm1vXd/42g9)

[](https://paperpile.com/c/Sm1vXd/42g9)

The short term benefits of a laparoscopic approach to liver resection
compared to open are well
described,[^7,8^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/XseHJ+6WBVf) including
reduced postoperative pain and analgesia requirement, smaller incisions,
less wound complications, reduced hospital length of stay
(LOS)[^9,10^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/bwtaf+PEd6X) and even
reduced overall
cost.[^11,12^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/8MS6i+McDrm) There is,
however, a relative paucity of quality studies comparing survival and
long-term outcomes for open versus laparoscopic resection of CLM.

Our unit began LLR for CLM in 1999, with the first laparoscopic right
hepatectomy performed in 2000. A randomised controlled trial (RCT)
comparing laparoscopic to open hepatectomy for malignancy remains
difficult to achieve, therefore this study attempts to maximise the
utility of collected observational data by using statistical tools that
enable balance across treatment and control groups.

Propensity score-based analyses have grown in popularity in recent
years, in large part due to the promise of reducing confounding inherent
in observational cohort studies. Inverse probability of treatment
weighting (IPTW) using the propensity score has a number of potential
advantages over more common matching techniques. Evaluating data using
these models adds some statistical complexity, however if well
specified, can allow estimation of causal effects from observational
data.

**Method**

*Patient selection*

Ethics approval was obtained for a retrospective review of prospectively
collected data, involving patients undergoing liver resection for CLM
from 2000 to 2014. Five surgeons (NO’R, LN, IM, RB, DC) at three
Brisbane institutions (RBWH, TWH, HSNH) during that period performed all
operations. Patient demographics, operative details and data on both
intraoperative and postoperative adverse events were recorded
prospectively from 2004 in a secure hepatic surgery database. Data from
before this period was obtained retrospectively. Details of the
colorectal primary (size, location, lymph node status, differentiation
and operative details), burden of liver disease (tumour number,
location, diameter, total tumour volume) and CEA were collected.
Clinical Risk Scores[^13^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/U3s9) and pre-
and postoperative Basingstoke Predictive Index (BPI)
scores[^14^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/QalD6) were determined from
their component factors at the time of data analysis.

*Preoperative Patient Management*

Diagnosis of liver metastases was made with either high definition,
multiphase, computed tomography (CT) or more recently, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) with liver specific contrast (Gd-EOB-DTPA,
Primovist™ or
Eovist™).[^15–17^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/XVqzA+HAw74+oHjCx)
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging was used routinely since
becoming available in 2004, to exclude extrahepatic disease.

Patients were discussed at a multidisciplinary team meeting (MDT).
Pseudo-neoadjuvant and/or adjuvant chemotherapy was used as per
consensus after discussion at MDT. Whether a patient was to receive open
or laparoscopic resection had no influence on the overall chemotherapy
approach determined at MDT. All surgeons had experience in, and offered
both laparoscopic and open surgery. If the projected remnant liver was
less than 30% of total liver volume, if the risk of postoperative liver
insufficiency was high, or if patients had resectable bilobar disease,
portal vein embolisation or ligation, and/or 2-step staged hepatectomy
was used.[^18^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/HJUTJ)

*Operative Techniques*

Over the study period, techniques of both laparoscopic and open liver
surgery have evolved. Open liver resection was performed using standard
techniques. For major hepatectomy, extrahepatic division of the portal
vein, hepatic artery and hepatic veins with parenchymal transection
using CUSA™ (Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator, Tyco Healthcare,
Mansfield, MA, USA) was most commonly used.

Most laparoscopic resections were performed in a “pure” fashion, with
specimen extraction following the end of the hepatectomy via a
Pfannenstiel incision or extension of the umbilical port site.
Occasionally, “hybrid” and “hand-assisted” techniques were performed.
Laparoscopic ultrasound was performed to confirm the number and location
of lesions. Parenchymal division has evolved from the use of stapling
devices and Harmonic Shears^®^ (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH,
USA) to “hot” Kelly-clysis using a laparoscopic dolphin tip Ligasure™
(Covidien, Mansfield, MA) with copious irrigation. Hem-o-lok^®^ clips
(Weck Surgical Instruments, Teleflex Medical, Durham, NC) were used for
vascular control with occasional stapler use for larger
vessels.[^19^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/AJKfS)

The Brisbane terminology[^20^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/4l6Fo) was
used for classifying all liver resections. Intraoperative complications
were classified as grade I, II or III, based on the Satava
classification of intraoperative
incidents[^21^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/n5CHU) adapted for
LLR.[^22^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/LawRG)[](https://paperpile.com/c/Sm1vXd/r0U4)

[](https://paperpile.com/c/Sm1vXd/r0U4)

*Postoperative Management*

Patients were occasionally admitted to ICU postoperatively, based on the
presence of significant preoperative comorbidities or intraoperative
surgical or anaesthetic complications. Standard postoperative cares
included chemical and mechanical DVT prophylaxis, postoperative
analgesia, monitoring of liver function and early mobilisation.
Postoperative analgesia was most often intravenous patient-controlled
analgesia and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. Epidural and
single-shot intrathecal analgesia were used occasionally.

Postoperative complications were graded and recorded using the
Dindo-Clavien
classification.[^23^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/RhfxA) Routine
postoperative follow-up consisted of clinical assessment and CEA levels
at 3, 6, 12, 18 and 24 months, then annually, with imaging performed at
6 monthly intervals or sooner, if indicated. Recurrent disease was
diagnosed on imaging and included disease at extrahepatic sites. RFS was
defined as time from resection until the development of a recurrence,
either hepatic or extrahepatic, or death. OS was measured from study
entry until death (any cause).

*Statistics and Survival Analysis*

Data was considered on an intention-to-treat (ITT) basis, such that
patients who required conversion to hand assist, hybrid or open
approach, were included in the laparoscopic group. Propensity scores
were generated using generalised boosted modelling (GBM) logistic
regression modelling. Based on available
evidence,[^7^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/XseHJ) preoperative
baseline covariates were selected to calculate propensity scores. Age,
sex, planned major resection status, maximum lesion diameter, number of
lesions, bilateral lesions, primary T stage, primary N stage, primary
tumour grade, previous chemotherapy, time since primary resection and
difficult tumour location (segments 1, 4a, 7, 8) were determined as the
important measurable variables affecting treatment selection. Note that
only covariates available prior to surgery are used to calculate the
propensity score, as the aim is to create a balanced population for
treatment selection, not for outcome assessment. To minimise the impact
of missing data, multiple imputation using chained equations (MICE)
(using classification and regression trees to generate five complete
data sets) was performed. After
Hill,[^24^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/z18J) statistics were
generated as pooled estimates across the imputed data sets using Rubin’s
rules.[^25^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/Lkem)

*GBM*
-----

GBM-based logistic regression is a non-parametric method that
algorithmically calculates an optimal model of treatment assignment
based on the selected covariates and their interactions (two-way in this
case). It is a widely used machine learning technique throughout the
social sciences and industry. It was chosen over simple logistic
regression as recent studies of PS estimation have shown superior
performance in terms of bias reduction and mean-squared
error[^26^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/0BEc) with machine learning
techniques. Additional advantages include the ability to handle highly
correlated variables and eliminating the need for scaling and
normalisation. It allows modelling of complex, non-linear relationships
between treatment assignment and important covariates.

GBM models require some tuning to achieve balance. Model optimisation
was achieved by minimising the largest Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic
of the covariates. The average treatment effect (ATE) was used to
generate a balanced population. This provides the best possible
comparator to a randomised control trial where we wish to estimate the
average effect of moving the entire population from untreated (open) to
treated (laparoscopic). It differs from matching on the PS, which
provides an estimate of the average effect of the treatment (ATT) on the
population that ultimately received the treatment. Balance was analysed
by assessing the average standardised absolute mean difference (ASAM)
defined as the treatment group mean minus the control group mean divided
by the pooled sample standard deviation. Values less than 0.2 represent
small differences between groups, 0.2-0.4 moderate, and \>0.6
large.[^27^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/OUb6y)

***IPTW with the propensity score***

The propensity score (PS) is defined as the probability that a patient
would be assigned to a particular treatment conditional on the observed
baseline covariates. This probability is known by design in RCTs, but in
the observational setting it must be estimated. There are a number of
propensity score estimation methods available and different ways of
applying the score once calculated: stratification, matching, weighting
and covariate adjustment.[^28^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/jfYeS)
Matching and weighting are the most common as both have been shown to
have superior performance to the other methods for most common
situations. An important aspect is specification of the target
“estimand”. Pair matching methods will, by definition, estimate the
average effect of treatment on those who ultimately received the
treatment (so called “ATT”). The ATT-based PS looks at the effect of the
treatment only as it applies to those who actually received it - i.e.
what was the effect of laparoscopy compared with open for patients
similar to those who had a laparoscopic procedure? This occurs because
we start with a group of treated patients and match controls that have
similar baseline covariates (and hence a similar PS). This differs from
a RCT, which estimates the average effect of moving an entire group from
untreated to treated (so called “ATE”). The ATE looks at the effect of
laparoscopy if it could be applied to all patients in the sample, and
can be estimated with techniques such as IPTW using PS. IPTW generates a
single pseudo-population in which the balance of pre-treatment
covariates is similar (as in a RCT) and therefore allows a stronger
statement of causation to be made.

Following propensity score generation, stabilised inverse probability of
treatment weights (IPTW) were calculated. For pre-treatment covariates
where the balance estimates remained of concern (ASAM \>0.2),
double-robust (DR) Cox proportional hazards regression was performed. DR
Cox combines regression and PS weights such that any bias due to small
imbalances that persist after weighting can be accounted for via
subsequent
regression.[^29,30^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/MnuU+Mnz4)

All statistical analyses were performed with R (v3.1.0, R core team
2014) using the survival,[^31^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/WW0J7)
twang,[^32^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/d7lcw)
survey[^33^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/0luhx) and
mice[^34^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/lQLs) packages. Overall
survival (OS) was defined as time to death by any cause, and recurrence
free survival (RFS) as time to recurrence (any location) or death by any
cause.

Further details of the modelling and propensity scores, including R code
for the performed analyses, can be found in the supplement or linked at
[*https://dcava.github.io/wpp*](https://dcava.github.io/wpp).

**Results**

*Perioperative Outcomes*

After excluding seven patients with planned two-stage hepatectomy, a
total of 146 LLRs and 138 open resections were carried out in 262
patients. 222 patients had a single operation and 27 had two or more
liver resections. 13 (8.9%) laparoscopic resections were converted to an
open procedure due to adhesions (n=3), haemorrhage (n=6) and failure to
progress (n=4). 1 patient (0.7%) was converted to a hybrid procedure due
to equipment failure and another converted to hand assist (0.7%) due to
failure to progress. To maintain a conservative estimate of treatment
effect, 10 patients (6.8%) who had hybrid operations and 2 (1.4%) with
hand assisted procedures were included as laparoscopic procedures. The
types of resections performed are summarised in Table 1.

In the laparoscopic group, all intraoperative adverse events were due to
grade I haemorrhage (n=7), with no grade II or III events. In the open
group, grade I (n=5) and grade II (n=1) adverse events were all bleeding
related. One patient had a grade III event due to complete common bile
duct transection, requiring return to theatre for hepaticojejunostomy.
Postoperative complications are detailed in Table 3. There was no
mortality (30-day or in-hospital) after laparoscopic resection. Two
postoperative deaths occurred after open resection (1.4%); one patient
from an aspiration pneumonia and one due to postoperative hepatic
failure.

A comparison of weighted and unweighted postoperative outcomes are shown
in Table 4. Median operation time (p\<0.0001), HLOS (p\<0.0006), blood
loss (p\<0.0001) and positive margin frequency (p=0.03) were
significantly reduced following laparoscopic surgery compared to open.

Due to the small number of patients having more than two resections
(n=6), estimates for these resections were unstable and therefore
subsequent resections (greater than two) are considered the same as a
second resection - the data is still included in OS and RFS calculation,
however it is not possible to separate the effect of having two
resections from having three or four. Similarly, the small number of
primary T1 tumours necessitated their incorporation into the same group
as T2 tumours, forming a combined T1/T2 group.

*Balance Diagnostics*

Significant differences exist between the laparoscopic and open groups
at baseline (Table 2). The proportion of patients planned for major
resection, with tumours in difficult locations or with multiple lesions
was significantly greater in the open resection group. Following IPTW,
there was good balance across all covariates, with no statistically
significant differences remaining. The impressive change following
weighting can be seen in Figure 1. The Quantile-Quantile plot (Figure 2)
provides another visual assessment of balance. The diagonal line
represents the expected distribution of p-values from independent tests.
Significant deviation of values below diagonal suggests lack of balance
whilst p-values on or above suggests balance might have been achieved.

Whilst not “statistically” significant, the indicators of major
resection, bilaterality, lesion count and primary N-stage remain
imperfectly balanced with ASAM \> 0.2 (Table 2). These covariates were
included in a double-robust Cox regression model to ensure that any
residual bias did not impact the estimate for treatment effect. The
hazard ratios for the double-robust model (HR 0.98 95% CI 0.53-1.81) and
treatment only models (HR 0.96, 95% CI 0.55-1.68) for overall survival
did not differ and none of the included covariates had coefficients with
significant effect, suggesting that the propensity score model was well
specified, with minimal residual bias despite persistent small
imbalances.

*Oncological & Survival Outcomes*

Median follow-up was 36 months. Weighted Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
showed no difference in 5 year OS (54% vs 63%, generalised Wilcoxon test
p=0.66) or median OS (101 vs 76 months) between the laparoscopic and
open groups respectively (Figure 1). 5 year RFS (34% vs 25%, generalised
Wilcoxon test p=0.5) did not differ between the laparoscopic and open
groups (Figure 2). Stratified by procedure number, the median survival
after the first liver resection was 33 months (95% CI 25-61) and after
subsequent resections was 24 months (95% CI 14-∞) for the whole cohort.
There was no significant difference between the laparoscopic or open
groups. The double-robust Cox proportional hazard ratios for OS and RFS
for the laparoscopic approach were HR 0.98 (95% CI 0.53-1.81) and 1.04
(95% CI 0.69-1.59).

Whilst the major purpose of this study was to analyse outcomes based on
treatment assignment alone (after generating a balanced sample),
multivariate IPTW Cox proportional hazards models were generated for
both OS and RFS based on covariates that were important on univariate
analysis, including primary T and N stage, bilateral lesions, lesion
count, major procedure, blood loss, margin status, length of hospital
stay and operative time (Table 5). The hazard ratio for surgical
approach was unaffected by multivariate adjustment. A primary T4 lesion
was a strong predictor of both poor OS (HR 6.97, 95% CI 1.79-27.22) and
RFS (HR 2.67, 95% CI 1.09-6.51). The effect of hospital length of stay
was small but significant, with an increased risk of death or recurrence
of approximately 5% for each additional day in hospital over the mean
LOS (approximately 8 days). This likely represents a proxy marker for
the occurrence of postoperative complications. The presence of bilateral
lesions had an impact on RFS (HR 1.72, 95% CI 1.05-2.83) but not OS,
leading to an increase in the rate of recurrence of over 70% compared
with those without bilateral lesions.

**Discussion**

Liver resection, along with systemic chemotherapy, offers long-term
survival in patients with CLM. In considering a minimally invasive
approach to surgery for any cancer, surgical and oncological safety
remain the guiding principles. Laparoscopic surgery offers obvious
benefits in short term outcomes, but it is important to demonstrate that
long term cancer outcomes are at least equivalent to those achieved with
open surgery. In the absence of prospective RCTs, clinicians must rely
on comparative studies; however there will always be bias in such
studies. In particular, there may be significant bias in treatment
assignment - the very effect we are trying to measure. This is
particularly the case in LLR, where most surgeons begin their experience
with simple cases and generally follow international consensus
guidelines for patient selection. In this report of our experience with
laparoscopic and open resection of CLM over the last 14 years, we have
attempted to maximise the utility of our observational data using IPTW
to account for such bias.

With good balance after weighting, 5-year OS and RFS were comparable
between laparoscopic and open groups. These results are consistent with
previous smaller, case-controlled, comparative
studies[^35–39^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/CZzLO+qd75l+zQHAt+jjtIC+mmGgL)
(Table 6) and a recent
meta-analysis,[^40^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/uVwz4) confirming
that a laparoscopic approach to hepatectomy is oncologically equivalent
to open. Following weighted, multivariate adjustment, the T-stage of the
primary (in particular T4) was a consistent predictor of increased risk
of death and early recurrence in our population, as were bilateral
lesions. Both of these factors have been linked to poor outcomes in past
analyses.

Despite the growing application of laparoscopy to liver resection for
malignancy, no RCT has been published to confirm comparable oncological
outcomes between laparoscopic and open approaches. Oft-quoted technical
concerns regarding the laparoscopic approach include the loss of tactile
inspection of the liver and peritoneal
cavity,[^41^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/C96Qj) risk of gas embolism
and difficulty in controlling catastrophic
bleeding.[^42^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/eirVG) No grade III
intraoperative haemorrhage or complications from gas embolism occurred
in the laparoscopic group, suggesting initial concerns regarding the
effects of pneumoperitoneum and the safety of applying laparoscopy to
liver resection have not been realised in this cohort. Similarly, there
were no port site metastases and perioperative complications were
comparable between groups.

The requirement of tactile palpation of the liver has, in our
experience, been obviated by the routine use of high quality
preoperative MRI and intraoperative ultrasound. Although there were no
deaths as a consequence of catastrophic haemorrhage in the laparoscopic
group, it should be stressed that these results are the product of
extensive experience with laparoscopic liver surgery, evolved over
nearly two decades. Without adequate training, experience and operative
care during minimally invasive liver surgery, disasters can occur.

Studies are increasingly emerging that demonstrate acceptable long term
survival following LLR for
CLM.[^9,35,39,43–48^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/H6xvo+bwtaf+CZzLO+6mWwq+tqgTL+RcTWV+iSc8p+E7bug+mmGgL)
Table 6 shows postoperative and survival data from the several
controlled studies in the literature comparing open and laparoscopic
resection of CLM, with the results from the current study included. This
study, to our knowledge, represents the largest cohort of laparoscopic
resections for CLM and the largest comparative study of its kind.
Several authors have used propensity score matching to minimise bias,
however this is the first study to use IPTW where the results may be
more broadly applicable and comparable to a RCT.

The generalisability of cohort comparison studies is limited by the bias
due to inherent differences between the non-randomised treated and
untreated subjects. The use of propensity scores has increased in the
scientific literature in recent
years[^49,50^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/GwyBg+eap2R) since the
method was first published by Rosenbaum and
Rubin[^51^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/5RwpO) as a way of accounting
for these differences in treatment assignment.

PS based techniques have much to offer, but come with their own
assumptions and limitations. Model specification, estimand selection,
balance diagnostics and matching technique all influence the final
interpretation of the model. Specifying all potentially important
baseline covariates, while ensuring that only preoperative variables are
included, is a necessity, but to an extent must rely on current evidence
and expert opinion for definition. Estimand selection (ATT or ATE) is
important as it defines the study question and the generalisability of
the results.

Commonly, the PS is estimated using multivariate logistic regression and
subsequently used to create matched cohorts. Recent studies have shown
that machine learning techniques such as the GBM used here, have
superior performance to logistic
regression[^26^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/0BEc) for generation of
the PS. Matching often comes at the cost of reduced sample size, which
is particularly important in survival analysis where small samples with
low event rates may lead to biased estimates.

By contrast, IPTW keeps information from most, if not all patients, by
exaggerating the importance of patients where, for example, their
baseline covariates would suggest they are likely to receive the control
but they in fact receive the treatment. This creates a “pseudo” sample
“in which the distribution of measured baseline covariates is
independent of treatment
assignment.”[^52^](https://paperpile.com/c/L2X3f5/Sq1lV)
[](https://paperpile.com/c/Sm1vXd/e3zV)

One covariate not captured completely in our model is “technical
difficulty”. Whilst proxies such as tumour location and size can be
used, these markers may not fully capture complexities such as proximity
to inflow or outflow structures. The fact that the laparoscopic group
had approximately half the positive margin rate (8% vs 18%) does raise
the spectre of unexplained complexity reserved for the open group. The
major limitation however, is that a non-randomised study cannot fully
account for ***unobserved*** differences between groups, and this
remains the most significant limitation of this analysis.

Patients who had unresectable hepatic or extrahepatic disease at initial
presentation were not captured by this analysis, as the primary goal of
the study was to compare survival in resectable disease. An area often
posed as a limitation to studies such as this, is failing to factor in
the effect of changing and improving neoadjuvant and adjuvant
chemotherapy regimes in the survival analysis. The case mix in this
study of laparoscopic and open resections on a per-year basis were
evenly matched, so both groups of patients received the most effective
chemotherapy regimens available at the time of their disease. The
surgical approach did not influence the selection of neoadjuvant or
adjuvant treatments applied.

Laparoscopic liver surgery for malignancy is here to stay. This study
has shown, after accounting for the various types of bias associated
with observational studies, that LLR for CLM is at least oncologically
equivalent to open resection, with comparable long term survival.

**References**

1\. [Manfredi S, Lepage C, Hatem C, Coatmeur O, Faivre J, Bouvier A-M.
(2006) Epidemiology and management of liver metastases from colorectal
cancer. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/aVGKQ)[*Ann Surg.
*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/aVGKQ)[244:254–259.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/aVGKQ)

2\. [Azagra JS, Goergen M, Gilbart E, Jacobs D. (1996) Laparoscopic
anatomical (hepatic) left lateral segmentectomy—technical aspects.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/2TIfB)[*Surg
Endosc.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/2TIfB)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/2TIfB)[10:758–761.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/2TIfB)

3\. [Hüscher CG, Lirici MM, Chiodini S, Recher A. (1997) Current position
of advanced laparoscopic surgery of the liver.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/cR7on)[*J R Coll Surg
Edinb.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/cR7on)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/cR7on)[42:219–225.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/cR7on)

4\. [O’Rourke N, Shaw I, Nathanson L, Martin I, Fielding G.
(200](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/UgJu)[4)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/UgJu)[Laparoscopic resection of hepatic
colorectal metastases. HPB.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/UgJu)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/UgJu)[6:230–235.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/UgJu)

5\. [Cherqui D, Husson E, Hammoud R, Malassagne B, Stéphan F, Bensaid S,
et al. (2000) Laparoscopic liver resections: a feasibility study in 30
patients. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4JpV)[*Ann
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4JpV)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4JpV)[232:753–762.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4JpV)

6\. [Dagher I, Gayet B, Tzanis D, Tranchart H, Fuks D, Soubrane O, et al.
(2014) International experience for laparoscopic major liver resection.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/EPqvz)[*J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci
[Internet]*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/EPqvz)[. Available from:
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/EPqvz)<http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jhbp.140>

7\. [Buell JF, Cherqui D, Geller DA, O’Rourke N, Iannitti D, Dagher I, et
al. (2009) The international position on laparoscopic liver surgery: The
Louisville Statement. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XseHJ)[*Ann Surg.
*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XseHJ)[250:825–830.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XseHJ)

8\. [Laurence JM, Lam VWT, Langcake ME, Hollands MJ, Crawford MD, Pleass
HCC. (2007) Laparoscopic hepatectomy, a systematic review.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6WBVf)[*ANZ J
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6WBVf)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6WBVf)[77:948–953.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6WBVf)

9\. [Nguyen KT, Laurent A, Dagher I, Geller DA, Steel J, Thomas MT, et
al. (2009) Minimally invasive liver resection for metastatic colorectal
cancer: a multi-institutional, international report of safety,
feasibility, and early outcomes.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/bwtaf)[
*Ann Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/bwtaf)[
250:842–848.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/bwtaf)

10\. [Pilgrim CHC, To H, Usatoff V, Evans PM. (2009) Laparoscopic
hepatectomy is a safe procedure for cancer patients.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/PEd6X)[*HPB*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/PEd6X)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/PEd6X)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/PEd6X)[11:247–251.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/PEd6X)

11\. [Kazaryan AM, Røsok BI, Edwin B. (2010) Laparoscopic and open liver
resection for colorectal metastases: different indications?
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/8MS6i)[*HPB*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/8MS6i)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/8MS6i)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/8MS6i)[12:434; author reply
435.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/8MS6i)

12\. [Cannon RM, Scoggins CR, Callender GG, Quillo A, McMasters KM,
Martin RCG 2nd. (201](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/McDrm)[3)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/McDrm)[Financial comparison of
laparoscopic versus open hepatic resection using deviation-based cost
modeling. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/McDrm)[*Ann Surg
Oncol.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/McDrm)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/McDrm)[20:2887–2892.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/McDrm)

13\. [Fong Y, Fortner J, Sun RL, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH.
(1999](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[Clinical score for predicting
recurrence after hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer:
analysis of 1001 consecutive cases.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[*Ann
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[230:309–3](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[21](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/U3s9)

14\. [Rees M, Tekkis PP, Welsh FKS, O’Rourke T, John TG. (2008)
Evaluation of long-term survival after hepatic resection for metastatic
colorectal cancer: a multifactorial model of 929 patients.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/QalD6)[*Ann
Surg*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/QalD6)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/QalD6)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/QalD6)[247:125–135.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/QalD6)

15\. v[an Kessel CS, Buckens CF, van den Bosch MA, van Leeuwen MS, van
Hillegers](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XVqzA)[berg R, Verkooijen
HM](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XVqzA)[. (2012) Preoperative imaging
of colorectal liver metastases after neoadjuvant chemotherapy: a
meta-analysis.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XVqzA)[*Ann*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XVqzA)[
*Surg
Oncol*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XVqzA)[*.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/XVqzA)
19:2805-2813.

16\. [Bipat S, van Leeuwen MS, Comans EFI, Pijl MEJ, Bossuyt PMM,
Zwinderman AH, et al. (2005) Colorectal liver metastases: CT, MR
imaging, and PET for diagnosis--meta-analysis. Radiology.
237:123–131.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/HAw74)

17\. [Halavaara J, Breuer J, Ayuso C, Balzer T, Bellin M-F, Blomqvist L,
et al. (2006) Liver tumor characterization: comparison between
liver-specific gadoxetic acid disodium-enhanced MRI and biphasic CT--a
multicenter trial.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/oHjCx)[ *J Comput
Assist Tomogr.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/oHjCx)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/oHjCx)[30:345–354.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/oHjCx)

18\. [Kilburn DJ, Chiow AKH, Lewin J, Kienzle N, Cavallucci DJ, Bryant R,
et al. (2014) Laparoscopic approach to a planned two-stage hepatectomy
for bilobar colorectal liver metastases.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/HJUTJ)[*ANZ J Surg
[Internet]*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/HJUTJ)[. Available from:
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/HJUTJ)<http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ans.12748>

19\. [O’Rourke N, Fielding G. (2004) Laparoscopic right hepatectomy:
surgical technique. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/AJKfS)[*J
Gastrointest
Surg*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/AJKfS)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/AJKfS)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/AJKfS)[8:213–216.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/AJKfS)

20\. Strasberg SM, [Belghiti J,
Clavie](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)[n](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)[
PA, Gadzijev E, Garden JO, Lau WY et
al.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)[
(2000)](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)[ The Brisbane 2000
terminology of liver anatomy and resections.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)[*HPB*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)[.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/4l6Fo)2:333[–](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/oHjCx)339.

21\. [Satava RM. Identification and reduction of surgical error using
simulation. (2005)](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/n5CHU)[ *Minim
Invasive Ther Allied
Technol*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/n5CHU)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/n5CHU)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/n5CHU)[14:257–261.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/n5CHU)

22\. [Kazaryan AM, Røsok BI, Edwin B. (2013) Morbidity assessment in
surgery: refinement proposal based on a concept of perioperative adverse
events. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/LawRG)[*ISRN
Surg*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/LawRG)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/LawRG)[
Article ID
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/LawRG)[625093.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/LawRG)

23\. [Dindo D, Demartines N, Clavien PA.
(](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RhfxA)[2004)](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RhfxA)[
Classification of surgical complications: a new proposal with evaluation
in a cohort of 6336 patients and results of a survey.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RhfxA)[*Ann
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RhfxA)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RhfxA)240:205-213.

24\. [Hill J. (2004) Reducing bias in treatment effect estimation in
observational studies suffering from missing data. Columbia Universtiy
Academic Commons. Ava](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/z18J)[ilable
from:](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/z18J)[
http://](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/z18J)[hdl.handle.net/10022/AC:P:9697](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/z18J).

25\. [Rubin DB.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[(1987)](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[
Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in
Surveys](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[,](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[
1st
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[e](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[dn](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[.
New York:](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[ John Wiley &
Sons](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[,](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)[
pp.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Lkem)75[–](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0BEc)240.

26\. [Lee BK, Lessler J, Stuart EA. (2010) Improving propensity score
weighting using machine learning.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0BEc)[*Stat
Med.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0BEc)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0BEc)[29:337–346.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0BEc)

27\. [McCaffrey DF, Ridgeway G, Morral AR. (2004) Propensity score
estimation with boosted regression for evaluating causal effects in
observational studies. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/OUb6y)[*Psychol
Methods.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/OUb6y)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/OUb6y)[9:403–425.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/OUb6y)

28\. [Austin PC. (2011) An Introduction to Propensity Score Methods for
Reducing the Effects of Confounding in Observational Studies.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jfYeS)[*Multivariate Behav
Res*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jfYeS)[.
46:399–424.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jfYeS)

29\. [Golinelli D, Ridgeway G, Rhoades H, Tucker J, Wenzel S. (2012) Bias
and variance trade-offs when combining propensity score weighting and
regression: with an application to HIV status and homeless men.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/MnuU)[*Health Serv Outcomes Res
Methodol.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/MnuU)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/MnuU)[12:104–118.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/MnuU)

30\. [Kang JDY, Schafer JL. (2007) Demystifying Double Robustness: A
Comparison of Alternative Strategies for Estimating a Population Mean
from Incomplete Data. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Mnz4)[*Stat
Sci.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Mnz4)[
22](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Mnz4)[:](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Mnz4)[523–539.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Mnz4)

31\. [Therneau TM, Grambsch PM.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/WW0J7)[(2000)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/WW0J7)[Modeling Survival Data: Extending
the Cox Model.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/WW0J7) 1st edn. New York:
Springer Verlag, pp. 169-229.

32\. [Ridgeway G, McCaffrey D, Morral A, Burgette L, Griffin BA.
(201](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/d7lcw)[4](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/d7lcw)[)
Toolkit for Weighting and Analysis of Nonequivalent Groups: A tutorial
for the twang package. Available from:
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/d7lcw)<http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/twang/vignettes/twang.pdf>

33\. [Lumley T. Analysis of Complex Survey Samples. (2004)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0luhx)[*J Stat
Softw.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0luhx)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0luhx)[9:1–19.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/0luhx)

34\. [Van Buuren S, Groothuis-Oudshoorn K.
(20](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/lQLs)[11)
MICE](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/lQLs)[: Multivariate Imputation by
Chained Equations in R. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/lQLs)[*J Stat
Softw.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/lQLs)[
45:1-67.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/lQLs)[ Available from:
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/lQLs)<http://www.jstatsoft.org/v45/i03/paper>

35\. [Castaing D, Vibert E, Ricca L, Azoulay D, Adam R, Gayet B. (2009)
Oncologic results of laparoscopic versus open hepatectomy for colorectal
liver metastases in two specialized centers.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/CZzLO)[*Ann
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/CZzLO)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/CZzLO)[250:849–855.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/CZzLO)

36\. [Cannon RM, Scoggins CR, Callender GG, McMasters KM, Martin RCG 2nd.
(2012) Laparoscopic versus open resection of hepatic colorectal
metastases.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/qd75l)[*Surgery*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/qd75l)[.
152:567–57](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/qd75l)4.

37\. [Cheung TT, Poon RTP, Yuen WK, Chok KSH, Tsang SHY, Yau T, et al.
(2013) Outcome of laparoscopic versus open hepatectomy for colorectal
liver metastases. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/zQHAt)[*ANZ J
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/zQHAt)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/zQHAt)[83:847–852.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/zQHAt)

38\. [Guerron AD, Aliyev S, Agcaoglu O, Aksoy E, Taskin HE, Aucejo F, et
al. (201](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)[3)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)[Laparoscopic versus open
resection of colorectal liver metastasis.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)[*Surg
Endosc*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)[27:1138–1143.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/jjtIC)

39\. [Montalti R, Berardi G, Laurent S, Sebastiani S, Ferdinande L,
Libbrecht LJ, et al. (2014) Laparoscopic liver resection compared to
open approach in patients with colorectal liver metastases improves
further resectability: Oncological outcomes of a case-control
matched-pairs analysis. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/mmGgL)[*Eur J
Surg Oncol.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/mmGgL)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/mmGgL)[40:536–544.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/mmGgL)

40\. [Zhou Y, Xiao Y, Wu L, Li B, Li H.
(201](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/uVwz4)[3)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/uVwz4)[Laparoscopic liver resection as a
safe and efficacious alternative to open resection for colorectal liver
metastasis: a meta-analysis. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/uVwz4)[*BMC
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/uVwz4)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/uVwz4)[13:44.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/uVwz4)

41\. [Fong Y, Jarnagin W, Conlon KC, DeMatteo R, Dougherty E, Blumgart
LH. (2000) Hand-assisted laparoscopic liver resection: lessons from an
initial experience. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/C96Qj)[*Arch
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/C96Qj)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/C96Qj)[135:854–859.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/C96Qj)

42\. [Gigot J-F, Glineur D, Santiago Azagra J, Goergen M, Ceuterick M, et
al. (2002) Laparoscopic Liver Resection for Malignant Liver Tumors.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eirVG)[*Ann
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eirVG)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eirVG)[236:90–97.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eirVG)

43\. [Kazaryan AM, Pavlik Marangos I, Rosseland AR, Røsok BI, Mala T,
Villanger O, et al. (20](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/H6xvo)[10)
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/H6xvo)[Laparoscopic liver resection for
malignant and benign lesions: ten-year Norwegian single-center
experience. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/H6xvo)[*Arch
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/H6xvo)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/H6xvo)[145:34–40.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/H6xvo)

44\. [Sasaki A, Nitta H, Otsuka K, Takahara T, Nishizuka S, Wakabayashi
G. (2009) Ten-year experience of totally laparoscopic liver resection in
a single
inst](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)[itution](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)[.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)[*Br J
Surg*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)[*.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)[96:274–279.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/6mWwq)

45\. [Ito K, Ito H, Are C, Allen PJ, Fong Y, DeMatteo RP, et al. (2009)
Laparoscopic versus open liver resection: a matched-pair case control
study. ](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/tqgTL)[*J Gastrointest
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/tqgTL)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/tqgTL)[13:2276–2283.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/tqgTL)

46\. [Vibert E, Perniceni T, Levard H, Denet C, Shahri NK, Gayet B.
(2006) Laparoscopic liver resection.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RcTWV)[*Br J
Surg.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RcTWV)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RcTWV)[93:67–72.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/RcTWV)

47\. [Robles R, Marín C, Abellán B, López A, Pastor P, Parrilla P. (2008)
A new approach to hand-assisted laparoscopic liver surgery.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/iSc8p)[*Surg
Endosc*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/iSc8p)[.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/iSc8p)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/iSc8p)[22:2357–2364.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/iSc8p)

48\. [Huh JW, Koh YS, Kim HR, Cho CK, Kim YJ. (2010) Comparison of
laparoscopic and open colorectal resections for patients undergoing
simultaneous R0 resection for liver metastases.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/E7bug)[*Surg
Endosc.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/E7bug)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/E7bug)[25:193–198.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/E7bug)

49\. [Austin P. (2008) A critical appraisal of propensity‐score matching
in the medical literature between 1996 and 2003.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/GwyBg)[*Stat
Med*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/GwyBg)*.* 27:2037-2049.

50\. [Thoemmes FJ, Kim ES. (2011) A Systematic Review of Propensity Score
Methods in the Social Sciences.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eap2R)[*Multivariate Behav
Res.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eap2R)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eap2R)[46:90–118.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/eap2R)

51\. [Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB.
(](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/5RwpO)[1983)](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/5RwpO)[
The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for
causal effects.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/5RwpO)[*Biometrika.*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/5RwpO)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/5RwpO)[70:41–55.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/5RwpO)

52\. [Austin PC. (2011) A Tutorial and Case Study in Propensity Score
Analysis: An Application to Estimating the Effect of In-Hospital Smoking
Cessation Counseling on Mortality.
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Sq1lV)[*Multivariate Behav Res.
*](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Sq1lV)[
](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Sq1lV)[46:119–151.](http://paperpile.com/b/L2X3f5/Sq1lV)

[](http://paperpile.com/b/Sm1vXd/e3zV)

[](http://paperpile.com/b/Sm1vXd/e3zV)

[](http://paperpile.com/b/Sm1vXd/e3zV)

[](http://paperpile.com/b/Sm1vXd/e3zV)

[](http://paperpile.com/b/Sm1vXd/e3zV)

Table 1: Type of Liver Resections (based on main resection per
procedure)

  Type of resection   Laparoscopic                     Open
  ------------------- -------------------------------- ------ ----
  Anatomic            Left Lateral Sectionectomy^\#^   46
                      Hemihepatectomy^\#^              39
                      Segmentectomy/Bisegmentectomy    36
  Non-anatomic\*      26                               8

^\#^Can include additional segmentectomy/bisegmentectomy or tumorectomy

\*Procedures involving non-anatomic resection only

Table 2: Balance of preoperative covariates for unweighted and weighted
data (mean values)

                                       Unweighted   Weighted
  ------------------------------------ ------------ ---------- ------- ------ -------------- ------- ------- ------
                                       Lap          Open
  Age                                  63.36        60.49
  Sex(female)                          0.40         0.33
  CEA                                  35.24        51.74
  Major resection                      0.27         0.69
  Difficult location                   0.34         0.56
  Bilateral                            0.11         0.27
  Maximum diameter                     32.29        41.85
  Number of lesions                    1.47         2.13
  Primary: Moderately differentiated   0.77         0.64
  Poorly differentiated                0.19         0.27
  Well differentiated                  0.03         0.09
  T1/T2                                0.27         0.23
  T3                                   0.53         0.56
  T4                                   0.20         0.21
  N0                                   0.42         0.35
  N1                                   0.30         0.49
  N2                                   0.19         0.14
  N3                                   0.09         0.01
  Years from primary: 0                0.03         0.02
  1                                    0.47         0.36
  2                                    0.27         0.34
  3                                    0.09         0.09
  4                                    0.04         0.07
  5                                    0.10         0.12
  Previous chemotherapy                0.28         0.34

ASAM = average standardised absolute mean difference

Table 3: Postoperative Complications

  ------------------------------------------------
  Complication Grade & Type   Lap (n)   Open (n)
  --------------------------- --------- ----------
  GRADE 1 - Total             **6**     **4**

  GRADE 2 - Total             **12**    **14**

  GRADE 3 - Total             **5**     **11**
                                        
  bile leak                   2         5
                                        
  collection                  2         4
                                        
  hepatic encephalopathy      1         1
                                        
  other                       -         1

  GRADE 4 - Total             **2**     **4**
                                        
  bile duct injury            -         1
                                        
  haemorrhage                 1         2
                                        
  bile leak                   -         1
                                        
  bowel perforation           -         1

  GRADE 5 - Total             **0**     **2**
                                        
  hepatic encephalopathy      -         1
                                        
  aspiration                  -         1
  ------------------------------------------------

Table 4: Unweighted and weighted univariate postoperative outcomes

                                     Unweighted     Weighted
  ---------------------------------- -------------- ---------- --------- -------------- ---------- ---------
  Postoperative variables            Laparoscopic   Open
  Estimated blood loss (mL)\*        200            600
  Operation time (mins)\*            120            180
  Hospital length of stay (days)\*   5              8
  Positive margin frequency^\#^      12 (8%)        25 (18%)
  Margin distance (mm)\*             5              4.5

\*Median; ^\#^Chi square test of proportions

Table 5 Final multivariate model -

Hazard ratio (HR) for all-cause mortality (OS) and recurrence or
mortality (RFS)

                          **OS**              **RFS**
  ----------------------- ------------------- ----------- ------------------ -----------
                          *HR (95% CI)*       *p-value*
  **Laparoscopic**        0.99 (.55-1.80)     .98
  **Primary T4**          6.97 (1.79-27.22)   .01
  **LOS**                 1.05 (1.01-1.10)    .01
  **Bilateral lesions**   -                   -

LOS = length of stay

Table 6: Controlled studies comparing open vs laparoscopic liver
resections for CLM ^ϒ^



Figure 1



Figure 2



Figure 3



Figure 4: Weighted recurrence-free survival for first and subsequent
resections 
